[Music]
fora tv' the world is thinking the most
important reason for the rise of reality
television is simply financial the shows
are relatively inexpensive to produce I
mean if you think about an hour
primetime drama huge crews expensive
sets stars making hundreds of thousands
of dollars executive producers and
creators making vastly more than that
writers making millions per season and
as a rule dramatic shows cost vastly
less than sorry as a rule dramatic shows
cost vastly more than reality shows
but the revenues are on Canon off and
are quite a bit more on reality shows as
an example on last season's Thursday
night version Dancing with the Stars on
a 30-second commercial and Dancing with
the Stars got two and twenty nine
thousand dollars while Friday Night
Lights in the same time slot was able to
charge half that the hit show Grey's
Anatomy charges $450,000 per commercial
while American Idol reaps 750,000 per
commercial and as the finale approaches
they get about a million per commercial
so of course there's an incentive to
making these shows and there's no
shortage of people who want to
participate one of my students a woman
who was accomplished in numerous ways I
wish I had done as much as she had by my
mid-20s she was an investment banker a
lawyer accomplished in the arts and she
asked me about going on the apprentice
and what did I think
and I told her something my former boss
who was the creative law-and-order told
me he said television basically is about
one thing and one thing only it provides
a life support system for the
commercials and all television operates
in fealty to this so if she went on the
show they would basically walk up one
side of her back and down the other if
it would increase a ratings point by
1/100 of a percent they would create a
character her for her to play and she
would be that archetype role no matter
who she truly was and was that something
she really wanted to do and the truth is
nearly all reality shows aren't
particularly real the conceits the
casting the shooting the
editing the storytelling they're not
intended to serve as beacons of light
and truth they're intended to make the
audience stick through to the next set
of commercials I mean the standards are
what's considered ethically acceptable
in making most reality shows would make
the Nixon White House blush I mean these
shows frequently use what are called
Franken bytes and a Franken byte are
sound bytes that are taken out of
context statements from the participants
by stealing a word from here and two
words from there and then artificially
constructing these sentences and putting
them over neutral footage these
manufactured sentences are put presented
on screen as if the person on-screen has
said these words when in fact often they
haven't said these words and you know
sometimes you have situations where
it'll be 180 degrees the opposite of
with someone intended but they've
constructed these sentences and they
actually serve the story the producers
want to say but often have no relation
at all to the scene as it happened
television also on the reality side and
drama sites works on the idea wish
fulfillment I mean we all we want we all
look at things and want things as as we
hope they would be I mean the White
House isn't really run by a bunch of
extraordinarily ethical and smart types
especially now but we all will hope we
all hope it is you know and true love
isn't found in situations like you find
in The Bachelor but we all fantasize
that it could be and so it's the idea
that that the nobody who becomes a
chart-topping star and American Idol the
instant millionaire and survivor you
know in a world where criminals are
captured and justice is served all in 42
minutes and 43 on seconds of Chris
television
[Music]